# BioEngineering-Case-Study-Apnea-Detection
## Problem Identification and Statement
When high-risk apnea is present, breath monitoring is a critical diagnostic tool and safety precaution. Apnea occurrences must be tracked using secondary sources of information, such as cardiac arrhythmia (unexpected heart rate fluctuations), since direct monitoring of breathing is not always practicable. The sim of the program is to interpret Electrocardiography (ECG) signals from standardized medical datasets (from Physiobank) in the form of text files, utilize them to extract useful diagnostic information such as the heart rate value, etc., and use this information to estimate the incidence of sleep apneas.

## Gathering Relevant Information
The diagnosis of sleep Apnea is difficult, and it often involves a trained medical staff to watch overnight the sleep cycle of a patient. Developing systems that can allow the diagnosis of sleep Apnea is cost-effective. The direct measurement of chest movement tends to carry high noise given the similar frequency of other body movements, making this technique ineffective. That’s why ECG signals are one of the most feature rich and non-intrusive ways to detect various cardiac disorders.\
Sleep Apnea is a potentially serious sleep disorder in which breathing repeatedly stops and starts. This means that the heart beat becomes more random during this period. Hence, by performing a simple analysis of the variability of the heart beat rates, we can find out when a Sleep Apnea is occurring.\
In this project, we use hours of monitored ECG data collected while the subject is asleep. Correspondingly, files carrying information on apnea presence or absence are present during the whole duration of sleep, at minutely intervals. We evaluate the ECG data to determine how the occurrence of apneas influences the characteristics of the heart (average heart rate, maximum and minimum heart rates, etc). The analysis consists of both time-domain and frequency-domain components. This is done to strengthen our findings from the two investigations. On the basis of the two experiments, we then develop an algorithm to identify sleep apnea events using just ECG data.\
The ECG data is recorded as binary values in a.dat file with 16 bits each sample, 100 samples per second, and 200 A/D units per millivolt conversion voltage. Separate header files include information about each individual data file.\
